
                             Pine Project History
                                       
   Pine was originally conceived in 1989 as a simple, easy-to-use mailer
   for administrative staff at the University of Washington in Seattle.
   This constituency had previously been using a very nice mail system
   derived from UCLA's "Ben" mailer for the MVS operating system, but
   when the cost of maintaining our MVS system became prohibitive, we
   needed to find a Unix-based mailer that preserved the user-interface
   strengths of "Ben". Our goal was to provide a mailer that naive users
   could use without fear of making mistakes. We wanted to cater to users
   who were less interested in learning the mechanics of using electronic
   mail than in doing their jobs; users who perhaps had some computer
   anxiety. We felt the way to do this was to have a system that didn't
   do surprising things and provided immediate feedback on each
   operation; a mailer that had a limited set of carefully-selected
   functions.
   
   At that time, we could not find any Unix mailer (commercial or freely
   available) that met our requirements. Consequently, we reluctantly
   concluded that we would need to develop our own. The Elm mailer seemed
   like a reasonable starting point since its source code was freely
   available, so we started modifying it. Today there is virtually no Elm
   code left, and Pine has evolved so that many "power-user" features may
   be (optionally) enabled. We have tried to remain true to our original
   simplicity and ease-of-use goals by providing optional features for
   sophisticated users. In fact, if none of Pine's options are enabled,
   the latest version has almost the same look-and-feel as the very first
   version.
   
   One of the greatest problems with most mailers on Unix systems is the
   editor. One can normally choose between emacs and vi. We experimented
   with some versions of emacs and settled on a hacked version of micro
   emacs. Eventually it became heavily modified and tightly integrated
   with the rest of Pine. One of the main features of having a tightly
   coupled editor is that it can guide the user through editing the
   header of the message, and Pine takes great care to do this. A very
   simple and efficient interface to the Unix spell command was also
   added. The emacsstyle key bindings were retained, though most of the
   other wild and wonderful emacs functions were not. The Pine
   composition editor is also available as a very simple stand alone
   editor named pico.
   
   Also working at the University of Washington is the original author of
   the Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP). IMAP is a functional
   superset of POP, and provides a way to manipulate mailboxes on remote
   servers as if they were local. Specific advantages of IMAP over POP
   include: support for inbox access from multiple computers, access to
   more than one remote folder, selective access to MIME message parts,
   and support for disconnected operation.
   
   Not long after the Pine project began, The IMAP author had finished
   writing the "c-client" library as an interface to IMAP and as a switch
   between drivers for IMAP mailboxes, Berkeley mail files and Tenex mail
   files. In time, "c-client" became a full messaging API with support
   for RFC-822 parsing, MIME parsing and decoding, SMTP and NNTP drivers,
   and so forth. Great care was taken to make the code writing the mail
   files robust against disks filling up, and inter-process locking in
   order to guarantee mail file consistency. It was clear that Pine would
   benefit greatly from using the c-client to access mail storage so the
   original low-level Elm code was replaced by calls to c-client library
   routines. Consequently Pine can write and access a variety of
   different mail file formats and new ones can be added by creating a
   simple driver. In addition the c-client does a very careful job of
   doing all the RFC 822 header parsing and achieves the highest
   compliance with the RFC.
   
   Most of the work done on Pine from 6/92 to 6/93 focused on changes
   needed to support a truly distributed electronic messaging environment
   (e.g. remote folder manipulation), and getting Pine to run on DOS
   (which was a lot of work). The first version of PC-Pine (3.84) was
   released in July 1993, and included first steps toward integrating
   news and email access in Pine. Doing the DOS port was very difficult
   for a variety of reasons, but especially because of DOS memory
   management (or lack thereof). However, simply porting Pine 3.07 to DOS
   was not sufficient. For a desktop mailer such as PC-Pine to be useful
   at UW, it was necessary to fully support access to existing remote
   saved-message folders, as well as local (desktop) folders -- and of
   course, the remote INBOX. Accomplishing this required extensions to
   IMAP, a new version of the IMAPd server code, and extensive work in
   Pine to support multiple collections of folders.
   
   The principal reason for porting Unix Pine to DOS was to obviate the
   need for PC users to transfer files between their PC and the Unix
   system running Pine. Now it is possible to save messages directly to
   the PC's filesystem, and to directly include PC files in outgoing
   messages. And with Pine's MIME capability, binary files (e.g. word
   processing documents, spreadsheets, image files, executables) may be
   directly attached to your messages.
   
   With Pine 3.90, significant new functionality has been added, notably
   aggregate operations for manipulating groups of messages at once, the
   first (alpha) release of PC-Pine for the Winsock network interface
   standard, and greatly improved Usenet (News) support. One of the early
   interpretations of the name "Pine" was "Pine Is No-longer Elm"; today
   a "Program for Internet News and Email" seems more apropos.
   
   
     _________________________________________________________________
                                      
   
                                 Pine Credits
                                       
   The University of Washington Pine development team (part of the UW
   Office of Computing & Communications) includes:


 Project Leader:           Mike Seibel
 Principal authors:        Mike Seibel, Steve Hubert, Laurence Lundblade*
 C-Client library & IMAPd: Mark Crispin
 Pico, the PIne COmposer:  Mike Seibel
 Bug triage, user support: David Miller*
 Pine Web Pages:           Lynne Bivona, Jaime Prosser
 Documentation:            Many people!
 PC-Pine:                  Tom Unger, Mike Seibel
 Project oversight:        Terry Gray, Lori Stevens
 Principal Patrons:        Ron Johnson, Mike Bryant
 Additional support:       NorthWestNet
 Initial Pine code base:   Elm, by Dave Taylor & USENET Community Trust
 Initial Pico code base:   MicroEmacs 3.6, by Dave G. Conroy
 User Interface design:    Inspired by UCLA's "Ben" mailer for MVS

   * Emeritus

We'd also like to acknowledge the following contributions and contributors:
 Pine for VMS:  Portia Shao and Yehavi Bourvine
 Pine for OS/2: David Nugent
 Special mention:   David Wall
 Bug reports, bug fixes, ports, suggestions & encouragement:

The world-wide Pine community, including...

   Shoa Aminpour        Richard Gering    Richard Murphy
   J.J. Baily           Gordon Good       Il Oh
   Billy Barron         Bob Gregory       Mike Ramey
   Chris Beecher        Ed Greshko        Phil Rand
   John Benjamins       Dmitri L. GringauzJochiam Richter
   Birko Bergt          David Halliwell   Thomas Riemer
   Ken Bobey            Peter Hausken     Tim Rice
   Andy Brager          Jeff Hayward      Alexis Rosen
   D.K. Brownlee        Ron Johnson       Michael Ross
   Brian Burriston      William Kreuter   Bob Sandstrom
   Bill Campbell        Pekka Kytolaakso  Michael F. Santangelo
   Russel Campbell      Barry Landy       Shin-ya Satoh
   Donn Cave            Chris Latham      Corey Satten
   Richard Cheever      Jon Lebo          Michael Shepard
   Mike Coghlan         Allen Leonard     Vladimir Solnicky
   Justine Comer        Robert L. Lewis   Alan Thew
   Chuck Cooper         Bruce Lilly       Jason R. Thorpe
   Barry Cornelius      Matthew Lyle      Rick Troxel
   Michael A. Crowley   John Mackin       Marc Unangst
   Judith M. Dixon      James Matheson    Edward Vielmetti
   Jeff D. Doran        Nancy McGough     Ross Wakelin
   Tony Flemming        Mark McNair       Rich Wales
   Matthew Freedman     Pete Mellor       David Wall
   Richard Fritz        Dave Miller       Bob Williams
   Marcelo A. Gallardo  Don Miller        Steve Woodyatt
   Adam Garrett         Robert Morris


   And many others... Our thanks to all!
   
    Pine® Information Center
    Modified: July 8, 1998
